basic intro to ansible and playbooks (#59163)
ansible/ansible: docs/docsite/rst/user_guide/playbook_structure.rst

Ansible basic structures introduction
=====================================
=====================================

YAML Basics
===========

A `-` identifies a ‘list item’

.. code::
        - one
        - two
        - three

A word with a colon (word:) identifies a mapping/dictionary

.. code::
        this: mapping
        has: two keys

They can intermix so you can have a list of dictionaries and lists in dictionaries as well as lists of lists and dictionaries within dictionaries …

.. code::

    this_list:
        - 1
        - 2
        - hasadict: with
          several: keys
          and: values
          with:
            - a
            - list
            - also

'---'
-----

> What is the ``---`` we see on top of YAML files? This is a 'document separator', this is an OPTIONAL indicator that a YAML document is tarting and not needed for Ansible to function (though some linting programs will complain if it is missing).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
What is the ``---`` we see on top of YAML files? This is a 'document separator', this is an OPTIONAL indicator that a YAML document is starting and not needed for Ansible to function (though some linting programs will complain if it is missing).
```

Tasks
=====

> Tasks are the most common and used item in Ansible, they are the basis of everythign else and they define the 'actions' to take against our targets. A task only requires an ``action`` this normally corresponds to an existing module and/or action plugin.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Tasks are the most common and used item in Ansible, they are the basis of everything else and they define the 'actions' to take against our targets. A task only requires an ``action`` this normally corresponds to an existing module and/or action plugin.
```

.. code::

    - debug: msg=simple task

> Task are defined by the single action, you cannot have more than one action per tasks, that is 2 tasks, ``name`` and other keywords are optional in the task.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Task is defined by the single action, you cannot have more than one action per task, that is 2 tasks, ``name`` and other keywords are optional in the task.
```

Plays can ONLY appear inside a playbook, you cannot put a play inside another play nor any other object, see playbooks below.

Blocks
------

Blocks are not tasks (they do look like them), but they act as 'list of tasks' inside the 'list of tasks'

.. code-block:: YAML

  - hosts: all
    pre_tasks:
     - block:
          - name: this is a simple task
            debug: msg=simple task

While not being tasks themselves, blocks can appear anywhere a task can as they just 'wrap' tasks.

For more information on blocks see here:

Roles
-----

Roles also contain tasks, but mostly in a separate file, as such, they can appear in plays in several ways,
most of the time you see them via the ``roles`` keyword:

.. code-block:: YAML

   - hosts: all
     roles:
        - rolename

But they can also be included almost anywhere a task can, via the M(include_role) and M(import_role) actions.

.. code-block:: YAML

   - hosts: all
     tasks:
        - include_role: name=rolename
     post_tasks:
        - include_role: name=otherrole

For more information on roles see here:

Playbooks

> =========

Reviewer 2: Since a new user is likely reading this doc in order to know what a "playbook" is, I think we should have a very simple playbook example as the very first topic instead of buried deep within this doc as the last point. We could then begin discussing the separate elements within the sample playbook in depth. More detailed/complex playbooks could be shown at the end, if desired.

:orphan:

Ansible basic structures introduction
=====================================
=====================================

Introcduction
=============

To use Ansible you might want to pickup some basic terminology, though you find most terms in the :ref:`glossary`, here we have a quick rundown of the basics.

>  * Playbook: a list of plays (sometimes also used to reffer to the file that contains the plays) :ref:``Playbooks``

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
 * Playbook: a list of plays (sometimes also used to refer to the file that contains the plays) :ref:``Playbooks``
```

 * Play: ties a list of hosts to a list of tasks :ref:``Plays``
 * Task: an action to execute on a host :ref:``Tasks``

A simple playbook with 1 play and 2 tasks, written in YAML:

.. code-block:: YAML

    - name: Sample playbook
      hosts: all
      vars:
        a_var: I am a variable value
      tasks:
        - name: I am a task that executes a command
          command: echo {{ a _var }}

>           register: result    - name: debug the result

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
          register: result
```

        - name: print result of command to screen
          debug:
            var: result.stdout

To understand the structure above you might want to check out the YAML Basics

YAML Basics
===========

> YAML is a data formating language, it is 'space senstitive' and relies on indentation vs having tags ``<stuff> </endstuff>`` or other separators (``{``, ``}``, ``(``, ``)``, etc). It does have a 'short form' that looks a lot like JSON but it is less strict about quoting, most YAML parsers can read JSON directly.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
YAML is a data formatting language. It is 'space sensitive' and relies on indentation rather than having tags (e.g.``<stuff> </endstuff>``) or other separators (``{``, ``}``, ``(``, ``)``, etc). It does have a 'short form' that looks a lot like JSON, but it is less strict about quoting. Most YAML parsers can read JSON directly.
```

Author: docs team doesn't want us using `e.g`, not good for translations

> The most basic types are simple, a string looks like a string, so does a number, but once you get into 'container' types, you run into issues, the most basic containers are lists (aka arrays, stacks, etc)  and dictionaries (aka mappings, associative arrays, hashes, etc).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The most basic types are simple. A string looks like a string, so does a number, but once you get into 'container' types, you run into issues. The most basic containers are lists (aka arrays, stacks, etc) and dictionaries (aka mappings, associative arrays, hashes, etc).
```

A ``-`` character identifies a 'list item'.

.. code-block:: YAML

    - one
    - two
    - three

Or in short form YAML.

.. code-block:: YAML

    [one, two, three]

A word with a colon (word:) identifies a mapping/dictionary

.. code-block:: YAML

    this: mapping
    has: two keys

Also in short form:

.. code-block:: YAML

    {this: mapping, has: 'two keys'}

They can intermix so you can have a list of dictionaries and lists in dictionaries as well as lists of lists and dictionaries within dictionaries …

.. code-block:: YAML

    this_list:
        - 1
        - 2
        - hasadict: with
          several: keys
          and: values
          with:
            - a
            - list
            - also

'---'
-----

> What is the ``---`` we see on top of YAML files? This is a 'document separator', this is an OPTIONAL indicator that a YAML document is starting and not needed for Ansible to function (though some linting programs will complain if it is missing). You may also see a related delimiter ``...``, which is also optional, that means 'end of document'.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
What is the ``---`` we see on top of YAML files? This is a 'document separator'. It is an OPTIONAL indicator that a YAML document is starting and not needed for Ansible to function (though some linting programs will complain if it is missing). You may also see a related delimiter ``...``, which is also optional, that means 'end of document'.
```

For more details on YAML you can go here :ref:`yaml_syntax`.

Tasks
=====

> Tasks are the most common and used item in Ansible, they are the basis of everything else and they define the 'actions' to take against our targets. A task only requires an ``action`` this normally corresponds to an existing module and/or action plugin.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Tasks are the most common and used item in Ansible. They are the basis of everything else and they define the 'actions' to take against our targets. A task only requires an ``action``. This normally corresponds to an existing module and/or action plugin.
```

.. code-block:: YAML

    - debug: msg=simple task

> A task is defined by the single action, you cannot have more than one action per task, that would require 2 tasks, ``name`` and other keywords are optional in the task.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A task is defined by the single action. There may only be one action per task. The ``name`` keyword within a task is optional, but it is used during the display of Ansible output.
```

.. code-block:: YAML

    - name: this is a simple task
      debug: msg=simple task

    - name: this is not a valid task because it has 2 actions
      debug: msg=simple task
      copy: src=/etc/localfile dest=/tmp/remotefile

> You may have noticed, tasks are always prefixed by a `-`, this is because they are always an 'item of a list', tasks can only exist inside 'task lists', these task lists must reside inside a play, directly or indirectly via a role, block, include or import.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As you may have noticed, tasks are always prefixed by a `-`. This is because they are always an 'item of a list'. Tasks may only exist inside 'task lists'. These task lists must reside inside a play, directly or indirectly, via a role, block, include or import.
```

> There are 2 ways to write tasks, 'key value pairs' or k=v and pure yaml, which mostly describes how the module/action arguments are defined.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
There are two ways to specify the arguments of a task: 'key-value pairs' (e.g., `key=value`) and pure yaml (e.g., `key: value`)
```

.. code-block:: YAML

    - name: this is a YAML formatted task to copy a file from the controller to the target host
      copy:
        src: /etc/localfile
        dest: /tmp/remotefile

>     - debug: msg='this is a key value  pair task'

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    - debug: msg='this is a key-value pair task'
```

> Indentation is important in a task, to separate the task keywords from the module/action options:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Indentation is important in a task since it is used to separate the task keywords from the module/action options:
```

.. code-block:: YAML

    - name: this is the name keyword
      debug:
        msg: 'this is the msg option of the debug action'
      when: 'this is the conditional keyword for tasks' != 'so it must always align to the task itself'

> For a list of keywords and the where you can place them see ...

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For a list of keywords and where you may place them, see ...
```

> Handlers

Reviewer 2: Handlers are more of an advanced topic. I would remove this section entirely.

--------

Handlers are special tasks, not on how you define them, but on where they are located, they do not execute normally but on notification.For more information on handlers see here:

Plays
=====

> Plays are a simple mapping of hosts to tasks, plays bind the actions we define to the targets we desire to apply them to.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Plays are a simple mapping of hosts to tasks. Plays bind the actions we define to the targets we desire to apply them to.
```

.. code-block:: YAML

  - hosts: all

> is the simplest play, it just targets all hosts in inventory and (by default) runs M(gather_facts) on them.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This is the simplest play. It just targets all hosts in inventory and (by default) runs M(gather_facts) on them.
```

> There are many ways a play can contain tasks, the simplest one is the ``tasks`` keyword.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
There are many ways a play can contain tasks. The simplest one is the ``tasks`` keyword.
```

.. code-block:: YAML

    - hosts: all
      tasks:
        - name: this is a simple task
          debug: msg=simple task

> This keyword is just the home for a 'list of tasks', other ways a play can contain task is via the ``pre_tasks``, ``post_tasks`` and ``handlers`` keywords.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This keyword begins the definition of a 'list of tasks'. Other ways a play can contain tasks is via the ``pre_tasks``, ``post_tasks`` and ``handlers`` keywords.
```

> Plays can ONLY appear inside a playbook, you cannot put a play inside another play nor any other object, see playbooks below.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Plays may ONLY appear inside a playbook. You cannot put a play inside another play nor any other object. See playbooks above.
```

> Blocks

Reviewer 2: Blocks, being an advanced topic, can probably be left out of this as well.

------

Blocks are not tasks (they do look like them), but they act as 'list of tasks' inside the 'list of tasks'

.. code-block:: YAML

  - hosts: all
    pre_tasks:
     - block:
          - name: this is a simple task
            debug: msg=simple task

While not being tasks themselves, blocks can appear anywhere a task can as they just 'wrap' tasks.

For more information on blocks see here:

> Roles

Reviewer 2: Roles are an advanced topic too.

most of the time you see them via the ``roles`` keyword:

.. code-block:: YAML

   - hosts: all
     roles:
        - rolename

But they can also be included almost anywhere a task can, via the M(include_role) and M(import_role) actions.

.. code-block:: YAML

   - hosts: all
     tasks:
        - include_role: name=rolename
     post_tasks:
        - include_role: name=otherrole

For more information on roles see here:

Playbooks
=========

The definition is simple, playbooks are a 'list of plays', this is normally used to refer to a file with plays, but can also mean an Ansible execution with multiple plays from one or more files. For now we are going to assume the former. A simple playbook as an example:

.. code-block:: YAML

    - hosts: all

This just contains one play, that targtes all hosts, but you can also have more than play (why it is a 'list of plays').

.. code-block:: YAML

    - name: first play
      hosts: some
      tasks:
        ...

    - name: second play
      hosts: others
      roles:
        ...

playbooks can ONLY have plays, you cannot put a task in a playbook, only inside a play.

> import_playbook

Reviewer 2: import_playbook is an advanced topic.
